#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\date{}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 3.2cm
\rightmargin 3.2cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Estnltk — open source tools for Estonian natural language processing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
thispagestyle{empty}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Estnltk is a software library for analyzing and working with the Estonian
 language, with the goal of making 
\emph on
natural languge processing
\emph default
 (NLP) easy and productive for students and language researchers.
 It is similar to popular NLP libraries such as Natural Language Toolkit
 and TextBlob, which are mainly used for working with English 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "bird2006nltk,textblob"

\end_inset

.
 Estnltk is meant to be used with Python programming language 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "van2007python"

\end_inset

, which is a popular tool among language researchers and is also taught
 in Estonian universities.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Esnltk ties together existing open source components into an application
 programming interface (API), which includes most common, but most required
 functionality: word and sentence tokenization, morphological analysis and
 generation, lemmatization / stemming.
 There are also API-s for more advanced features such as clause segmenter,
 temporal expression tagger, named entity recognition, verb chain detector,
 Estonian Wordnet integration, grammar based information extraction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Main notion of Estnltk is a 
\emph on
corpus
\emph default
, which is a blob textual data and functions that operate on it.
 You can load a corpus from either text files or create one programmatically
 from other sources such as databases.
 After that, you can do many NLP tasks just by calling the relevant function
 or using a particular property of the corpus instance.
 For example, property 
\family sans
corpus.lemmas
\family default
 allows accessing the stemmed versions of the words.
 Many natural language processing use cases are covered in the documentation
 with examples.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Estnltk also has built-in pipeline for text clustering and evaluation.
 There are also graphical tools for building grammars with focus on information
 extraction.
 Estnltk is a relatively young software library, but is constantly being
 developed further with future goals to extend and integrate more tools.
 Estnltk is currently used for applied research and statistics by several
 major organizations in Estonia.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The aim of the presentation at Why Linguistics Conference is to introduce
 Estnltk library by showing how it can be used in practice for solving NLP
 tasks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "whylinguistics/estnltk"
options "amsalpha"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
